Integrate AutoRound into Diffusers (#13552)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/quantization/autoround.md

specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. -->

# AutoRound

[AutoRound](https://github.com/intel/auto-round) is an advanced quantization toolkit. It achieves high accuracy at ultra-low bit widths (2-4 bits) with minimal tuning by leveraging sign-gradient descent and providing broad hardware compatibility. See our papers [SignRoundV1](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.05516) and [SignRoundV2](https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.04746) for more details.

Install `auto-round`(version ≥ 0.13.0):

```bash
pip install "auto-round>=0.13.0"
```

To use the Marlin kernel for faster CUDA inference, install `gptqmodel`:

```bash
pip install "gptqmodel>=5.8.0"
```

## Load a quantized model

Load a pre-quantized AutoRound model by passing [`AutoRoundConfig`] to [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`]. The method works with any model that loads via [Accelerate(https://hf.co/docs/accelerate/index) and has `torch.nn.Linear` layers.

```python
import torch
from diffusers import ZImageTransformer2DModel, ZImagePipeline, AutoRoundConfig

model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"

> quantization_config = AutoRoundConfig(backend="marlin")

Reviewer: in case there is a better backend in the future, we'd better not to explicitly code like this. Besides, If users have install gptqmodel, we will use marlin. Otherwise, we will remind user to install it.

Author: ok

transformer = ZImageTransformer2DModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="cuda",
)

pipe = ZImagePipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    transformer=transformer,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,

>     device_map="cuda",

Reviewer: device->auto

Author: NotImplementedError: auto not supported. Supported strategies are: balanced, cuda, cpu

AutoRound focuses on weight-only quantization. The primary configuration is W4A16 (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), with flexibility in group size and symmetry:

| Configuration | `bits` | `group_size` | `sym` | Description |
|--------------|--------|-------------|-------|-------------|
| W4G128 asymmetric | `4` | `128` | `False` | Default. Good balance of accuracy and compression. |
| W4G128 symmetric | `4` | `128` | `True` | Faster dequantization, small accuracy trade-off. |
| W4G32 asymmetric | `4` | `32` | `False` | Higher accuracy at the cost of more metadata. |

## Save and load

<hfoptions id="save-and-load">
<hfoption id="save">

```python
from auto_round import AutoRound
autoround = AutoRound(
    tiny_z_image_model_path,
    num_inference_steps=3,
    guidance_scale=7.5,
    dataset="coco2014,
)
autoround.quantize_and_save("Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound")
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="load">

```python
import torch
from diffusers import ZImageTransformer2DModel, ZImagePipeline

model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"

# The inference backend will be automatically selected.
pipe = ZImagePipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,

>     device_map="cuda",

Reviewer: how about just setting the device_map to "auto"

)

image = pipe("a cat holding a sign that says hello").images[0]
image.save("output.png")
```

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

> 

Reviewer 2: Is it compatible with `torch.compile`?

Author: Yes, I tried below code and it works well.
`pipe.vae = torch.compile(pipe.vae, mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)`

Reviewer 2: What about the DiT? I am guessing users would want to quantize the DiT and compile it?

Example with torchao:

```py
import torch
from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline, PipelineQuantizationConfig, TorchAoConfig
from torchao.quantization import Int4WeightOnlyConfig

pipeline_quant_config = PipelineQuantizationConfig(
    quant_mapping={"transformer": TorchAoConfig(Int4WeightOnlyConfig(group_size=128))}
)
pipeline = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-dev",
    quantization_config=pipeline_quant_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="cuda"
)

pipeline.transformer.compile(transformer, mode="max-autotune", fullgraph=True)
```

Author: Actually, Z-image is also a DiT model, I didn't use Flux because the license of flux is not MIT or Apache 2.0.

Reviewer 2: Yeah but your code doesn't compile the DiT.

Author: Right, DiT should be verified with `pipe.transformer = torch.compile(pipe.transformer, mode="default", fullgraph=False)`
I updated the document and verified the DiT here.
https://github.com/xin3he/diffusers/blob/auto_round/docs/source/en/quantization/autoround.md#torchcompile

<!-- Copyright 2026 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. -->

# AutoRound

> [AutoRound](https://huggingface.co/papers/2309.05516) is a weight-only quantization algorithm. It uses sign gradient descent to jointly optimize weight rounding and min-max ranges. AutoRound targets W4A16 (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), reducing memory usage without sacrificing inference accuracy.

Reviewer: maybe we should refine this as we extend the support to activation quantization.

> [AutoRound](https://huggingface.co/papers/2309.05516) is a weight-only quantization algorithm. It uses sign gradient descent to jointly optimize weight rounding and min-max ranges. AutoRound targets W4A16 (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), reducing memory usage without sacrificing inference accuracy.

Reviewer 3: AutoRound supports methods more than weight-only quantization (WoQ). such as, FP8/MXFP8/MXFP4/NVFP4. Better to revise the description not limit to WoQ.

Author: Okay

model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"

quantization_config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, sym=False)
transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    transformer=transformer,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
pipe.to("cuda")

image = pipe("A cat holding a sign that says hello world").images[0]
image.save("output.png")
```

> [!NOTE]
> AutoRound in Diffusers only supports loading *pre-quantized* models. To quantize a model from scratch, use the [AutoRound CLI or Python API](https://github.com/intel/auto-round) directly, then load the result with Diffusers.

## Backends

AutoRound supports multiple inference backends. The backend controls which kernel handles dequantization during the forward pass. Set the `backend` parameter in [`AutoRoundConfig`] to choose one:

| Backend | Value | Device | Requirements | Notes |
|---------|-------|--------|--------------|-------|
| **Auto** | `"auto"` | Any | — | Default. Automatically selects the best available backend. |

> | **PyTorch** | `"auto_round:torch_zp"` | CPU / CUDA | — | Pure PyTorch implementation. Broadest compatibility. |

Reviewer: remove the details, torch, tirtion, marlin should work as well

Author: okay

| **Triton** | `"auto_round:tritonv2_zp"` | CUDA | `triton` | Triton-based kernel for GPU inference. |
| **Marlin** | `"gptqmodel:marlin_zp"` | CUDA | `gptqmodel>=5.8.0` | Best CUDA performance via the Marlin kernel. |

```python
from diffusers import AutoRoundConfig

# Auto-select (default)
config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128)

# Explicit Triton backend for CUDA

> config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, backend="auto_round:tritonv2_zp")

Reviewer: similar issue, backend="troch", marlin

- `backend` (`str`, defaults to `"auto"`): The inference backend kernel. See the [Inference backends](#inference-backends) table above.

## Quantization configurations

AutoRound focuses on weight-only quantization. The primary configuration is W4A16 (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), with flexibility in group size and symmetry:

| Configuration | `bits` | `group_size` | `sym` | Description |
|--------------|--------|-------------|-------|-------------|
| W4G128 asymmetric | `4` | `128` | `False` | Default. Good balance of accuracy and compression. |
| W4G128 symmetric | `4` | `128` | `True` | Faster dequantization, small accuracy trade-off. |
| W4G32 asymmetric | `4` | `32` | `False` | Higher accuracy at the cost of more metadata. |

## Save and load

Save and reload AutoRound quantized models using the standard [`~ModelMixin.save_pretrained`] and [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] methods.

### Save

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, AutoRoundConfig

model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"

> quantization_config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, sym=False)

Reviewer: we always recommend sym=True due to gptq kernel issue

model = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
model.save_pretrained("path/to/saved_model")
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline

transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    "path/to/saved_model",

>     torch_dtype=torch.float16,

Reviewer: we recommend using bf16 or just auto

<!-- Copyright 2026 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. -->

# AutoRound

> [AutoRound](https://github.com/intel/auto-round) is a weight-only quantization algorithm that uses **S**ign **G**radient **D**escent to jointly optimize rounding values and min-max ranges for weights. It targets the W4A16 configuration (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), reducing model memory footprint while preserving inference accuracy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[AutoRound](https://huggingface.co/papers/2309.05516) is a weight-only quantization algorithm. It uses sign gradient descent to jointly optimize weight rounding and min-max ranges. AutoRound targets W4A16 (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), reducing memory usage without sacrificing inference accuracy.
```

> > **Paper:** [AutoRound: Optimize Weight Rounding via Signed Gradient Descent for the Quantization of LLMs](https://huggingface.co/papers/2309.05516)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> Before you begin, make sure you have `auto-round` installed (version ≥ 0.13.0):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Install `auto-round`(version ≥ 0.13.0):
```

```bash
pip install "auto-round>=0.13.0"
```

> For best CUDA inference performance with the Marlin kernel, also install `gptqmodel`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use the Marlin kernel for faster CUDA inference, install `gptqmodel`:
```

```bash
pip install "gptqmodel>=5.8.0"
```

> ## Quickstart

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Load a quantized model
```

> Load a pre-quantized AutoRound model by passing [`AutoRoundConfig`] to [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`]. This works for any model in any modality, as long as it supports loading with [Accelerate](https://hf.co/docs/accelerate/index) and contains `torch.nn.Linear` layers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Load a pre-quantized AutoRound model by passing [`AutoRoundConfig`] to [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`]. The method works with any model that loads via [Accelerate(https://hf.co/docs/accelerate/index) and has `torch.nn.Linear` layers.
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline, AutoRoundConfig

> model_id = "your-org/flux-autoround-w4g128"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"
```

quantization_config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, sym=False)
transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    transformer=transformer,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
pipe.to("cuda")

image = pipe("A cat holding a sign that says hello world").images[0]
image.save("output.png")
```

> > **Note:** AutoRound in Diffusers only supports loading **pre-quantized** models. To quantize a model from scratch, use the [AutoRound CLI or Python API](https://github.com/intel/auto-round) directly, then load the result with Diffusers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> AutoRound in Diffusers only supports loading *pre-quantized* models. To quantize a model from scratch, use the [AutoRound CLI or Python API](https://github.com/intel/auto-round) directly, then load the result with Diffusers.
```

> ## Inference backends

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Backends
```

> AutoRound supports multiple inference backends. The backend determines which kernel is used for dequantization during the forward pass. Set the `backend` parameter in [`AutoRoundConfig`] to choose one:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
AutoRound supports multiple inference backends. The backend controls which kernel handles dequantization during the forward pass. Set the `backend` parameter in [`AutoRoundConfig`] to choose one:
```

| Backend | Value | Device | Requirements | Notes |
|---------|-------|--------|--------------|-------|
| **Auto** | `"auto"` | Any | — | Default. Automatically selects the best available backend. |
| **PyTorch** | `"auto_round:torch_zp"` | CPU / CUDA | — | Pure PyTorch implementation. Broadest compatibility. |
| **Triton** | `"auto_round:tritonv2_zp"` | CUDA | `triton` | Triton-based kernel for GPU inference. |
| **Marlin** | `"gptqmodel:marlin_zp"` | CUDA | `gptqmodel>=5.8.0` | Best CUDA performance via the Marlin kernel. |

> ### Example: specifying a backend

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

```python
from diffusers import AutoRoundConfig

# Auto-select (default)
config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128)

# Explicit Triton backend for CUDA
config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, backend="auto_round:tritonv2_zp")

# Marlin backend for best CUDA performance (requires gptqmodel>=5.8.0)
config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, backend="gptqmodel:marlin_zp")

# PyTorch backend for CPU inference
config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, backend="auto_round:torch_zp")
```

> ## AutoRoundConfig

Reviewer 4: this section feels a bit redundant since its already in the API docs. i would drop this

The [`AutoRoundConfig`] class accepts the following parameters:

- `bits` (`int`, defaults to `4`): Number of bits for weight quantization. Use `4` for W4A16.
- `group_size` (`int`, defaults to `128`): Group size for quantization. Weights in each group share the same scale and zero-point. Common values: `32`, `64`, `128`, or `-1` (per-channel).
- `sym` (`bool`, defaults to `False`): Whether to use symmetric quantization (`True`) or asymmetric quantization (`False`). Asymmetric is generally more accurate.
- `modules_to_not_convert` (`list[str]` or `None`, defaults to `None`): List of module name patterns to exclude from quantization. Use this to keep sensitive layers in full precision.
- `backend` (`str`, defaults to `"auto"`): The inference backend kernel. See the [Inference backends](#inference-backends) table above.

> ## Supported quantization configurations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Quantization configurations
```

AutoRound focuses on weight-only quantization. The primary configuration is W4A16 (4-bit weights, 16-bit activations), with flexibility in group size and symmetry:

| Configuration | `bits` | `group_size` | `sym` | Description |
|--------------|--------|-------------|-------|-------------|
| W4G128 asymmetric | `4` | `128` | `False` | Default. Good balance of accuracy and compression. |

> | W4G128 symmetric | `4` | `128` | `True` | Slightly faster dequantization, marginal accuracy loss. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| W4G128 symmetric | `4` | `128` | `True` | Faster dequantization, small accuracy trade-off. |
```

> | W4G32 asymmetric | `4` | `32` | `False` | Finer granularity, better accuracy, slightly more metadata overhead. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| W4G32 asymmetric | `4` | `32` | `False` | Higher accuracy at the cost of more metadata. |
```

> ## Serializing and deserializing quantized models

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Save and load
```

> AutoRound quantized models can be saved and reloaded using the standard [`~ModelMixin.save_pretrained`] and [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] methods.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Save and reload AutoRound quantized models using the standard [`~ModelMixin.save_pretrained`] and [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] methods.
```

> ### Save

Reviewer 4: i'd remove the separate `### Save` and `### Load` sections and just combine the code snippets in:

```md
<hfoptions id="save-and-load">
<hfoption id="save">

code here

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="load">

code here

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>
```

Author: resolved

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, AutoRoundConfig

> model_id = "your-org/flux-autoround-w4g128"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"
```

quantization_config = AutoRoundConfig(bits=4, group_size=128, sym=False)
model = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
model.save_pretrained("path/to/saved_model")
```

> ### Load

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline

transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    "path/to/saved_model",
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "your-org/flux-autoround-w4g128",
    transformer=transformer,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
)
pipe.to("cuda")

image = pipe("A beautiful sunset over the ocean").images[0]
image.save("output.png")
```

## Resources

- [AutoRound GitHub repository](https://github.com/intel/auto-round)

> - [AutoRound paper (arXiv:2309.05516)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05516)

Reviewer 4: these two also feel redundant since the first linked mention of AutoRound also directs to the paper and repo

```suggestion
```

> <!-- Copyright 2026 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to be added to `docs/source/en/_toctree.yml`?

Author: Done

Install `auto-round`(version ≥ 0.13.0):

```bash
pip install "auto-round>=0.13.0"
```

To use the Marlin kernel for faster CUDA inference, install `gptqmodel`:

```bash
pip install "gptqmodel>=5.8.0"
```

## Load a quantized model

Load a pre-quantized AutoRound model by passing [`AutoRoundConfig`] to [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`]. The method works with any model that loads via [Accelerate(https://hf.co/docs/accelerate/index) and has `torch.nn.Linear` layers.

```python
import torch
from diffusers import ZImageTransformer2DModel, ZImagePipeline, AutoRoundConfig

model_id = "INCModel/Z-Image-W4A16-AutoRound"

quantization_config = AutoRoundConfig(backend="auto")
transformer = ZImageTransformer2DModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="cuda",
)

pipe = ZImagePipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    transformer=transformer,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,

>     device_map="cuda",

Reviewer 2: Can we use the pipeline quantization config method (`PipelineQuantizationConfig`)? Example: https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/quantization/torchao

Author: Sure
